# student-history-helper

## Scope

This model is designed for a student to get help with writing history essays or looking at historical events through a different
lens. The model wants the the student find success through conversations and ideation. With an ulimate goal of helping a student
write something to fulfill a class requirement.

## Example
```
>>> I need to write an essay around the Magna Carta, where can i start?
That's a fascinating topic! Here's how you might approach it:

1. **Introduction**: Start by introducing the Magna Carta in a captivating manner. It could be with its historical significance
or an intriguing fact about it. For instance, did you know that the Magna Carta was not initially a symbol of freedom but rather
a result of a rebellion against King John?

2. **Historical Context**: Dive into the context leading up to its creation. What was England like in 1215 when it was sealed by
King John under duress? Who were the key players involved? You might want to discuss briefly about King John's rule and the
Barons' revolt that led to this document.

3. **The Content**: Explore what the Magna Carta entailed. What were its primary clauses or principles? It would be beneficial
to highlight how it limited the absolute power of the monarch, a revolutionary concept at the time.

4. **Immediate and Long-term Impact**: Discuss the immediate effects on England following its sealing. How was it enforced,
ignored, or amended? Then, delve into its enduring legacy - how did it shape constitutional law, influence democratic systems,
and inspire future documents like the U.S. Constitution?

5. **Criticisms and Misconceptions**: It's also important to address misconceptions about the Magna Carta. For example, while
it's often perceived as a charter of individual rights, it was primarily concerned with protecting the rights of the nobility
from royal arbitrary actions.

6. **Conclusion**: Summarize the essay's key points, and consider ending with a thought-provoking statement about its relevance
today. For instance, you might ponder on how this 800-year-old document still resonates in modern discussions of democracy and
rule of law.

Remember, each paragraph should ideally focus on one main idea. Also, make sure to properly cite all sources to avoid
plagiarism.

Let's start crafting your introduction together. How about something like this: "In the verdant landscape of 13th century
England, a charter of considerable weight was sealed under duress - an act that would ripple through time, shaping
constitutional law and democratic ideals..." What are your thoughts on this opening?

>>> How can I focus on how the Magna Carta took away the power of the Monarchy from King John?
That's a great angle to explore! Here's how you might structure that aspect:


1. **Historical Background**: Begin by setting the stage for King John's reign, emphasizing his autocratic style and the
discontent it sparked among the nobility. Highlight how his taxation policies (like the infamous "Scutage") and his conflict
with the Church had eroded his relationship with the barons.


2. **The Catalyst**: Discuss what led to the signing of the Magna Carta. It could be a chronological account starting from the
Barons' Revolt in May 1215, culminating in their demand for King John to confirm his adherence to ancient customs and rights.


3. **Specific Clauses**: Zero in on the specific clauses within the Magna Carta that curbed royal power. For instance, Clause 39
(No free man shall be seized or imprisoned...except by the lawful judgment of his equals) directly limited arbitrary royal
actions. Similarly, Clause 40, which required small feudal courts to be held regularly, could be seen as a check on monarchical
power.


4. **Immediate Impact**: Explore how these changes were received and implemented under King John's reign. How did the king
attempt to circumvent or ignore these clauses? This could lead into a discussion about why the charter was annulled by Pope
Innocent III just months after its signing, and subsequently reissued with modifications in 1216.


5. **Long-term Impact**: Conclude this section by discussing how these limitations on royal power were solidified over time,
even through periods when English kings sought to expand their prerogatives.


Remember to maintain a balance between historical narrative and analytical discussion. Use direct quotes from the Magna Carta
where possible to underscore your points. For example, you might write: "King John's agreement to 'no free man...shall be taken
or imprisoned' (Clause 39) marked a significant shift in power dynamics, ostensibly limiting his absolute authority."


Does this structure help guide your essay, and what are your initial thoughts on how King John might have felt about these
concessions?
```

